we've all heard the statistics about how
half of all businesses go under within 5
years but do you know why it's not
because they can't find customers or
employees it's not because they get into
some huge legal battle it's not even
that they're losing money it happens
because they get into situations that we
call Cash crunches according to a report
published by US Bank when businesses
fail it's a direct result of mismanaged
cash flow 82% of the time
they fail because they do not have the
cash on hand to meet their immediate
financial obligations they choke out
it's like drowning 3 in below the
surface so in this video we're diving
into five of the most common causes of
cash crunches and the steps you should
take to avoid them now a couple thoughts
before we dive in a lot of people
mistakenly confuse profitability and
cash flow and this is a really big
problem because they're different talk
to your accountant for a more new want
understanding but the gist of it is this
profitability is all about whether you
can sell your services for more than it
costs you to produce them right Revenue
minus variable expenses gives you your
gross profit you minus your overhead
that gives you your net profit I'm
simplifying a little bit but you get my
point cash flow on the other hand is
completely different it's all about the
timing of cash inflows and outflows so
just as an example think about an
average month in your business business
right on a Tuesday you collect a
progress payment from a client yay oh
just kidding that check actually bounced
on Sunday you go to run payroll and
surprise it's 20% higher than usual
because of all the overtime that you
forgot your cruise did Monday morning
comes around and your vendor calls let's
just say the lumber yard in this example
and they need 10 grand this week to keep
your account open you're an overdraft
well luckily for you you finish a
massive project tomorrow and you're to
get paid and it's all going to be good
or will you will the customer have a
punch list that's a mile long and delay
paying you as a result so here's where
I'm going with this guys cash crunches
happen when an onslaught of cash
outflows happen at or around the same
time that a bunch of expected inflows do
not happen it's a pinch point right and
every year we see otherwise profitable
companies go out of business because of
bad cash crunches so how does this
happen and how do we avoid it let's dive
in the first and most common cause of a
cash crunch is poor or non-existent cash
flow planning if you don't understand
where your cash is coming from and going
to how much of it is flying around and
when it's shockingly easy to
unintentionally land in a cash crunch
now a cash flow plan addresses cash
coming in and cash going out of the
business and it's concerned with your
cash position not so much profitability
that's what your budget is for that's
what job costing is for that's what all
the other tools and trackers that we
talk about on this channel are for now
as far as cash flow plans go here at
breakthrough Academy we've built a very
low Tech and easy to use plan that you
can grab for free you can download it
using the link in the description cause
number two is seasonality now the
seasonal nature of many Contracting
businesses here in North America can
mean that at certain times of the year
your cash inflows dip while your
overhead does not now forgetting about
that whole offseason part of the Year
may seem like an egregious oversight and
in many cases it is but hear me out
every single year we help businesses who
misjudge how much they need or they have
a large and unexpected expense come up
AKA taxes or for some other reason that
they couldn't predict are caught running
out of cash while their operations live
dormant big problem so the solution to
this is that cash flow plan that we
mentioned before that's huge accurately
forecasting your cash needs through the
slow season it's going to help you sleep
at night but more importantly if you do
need to figure out some financing to get
through that it's a lot easier to have
those conversations with the bank
earlier rather than later the second
thing I would say is just do not make
that rookie mistake of spending money to
save on taxes we've talked about this in
other video videos but unless you have a
very highlevel tax strategist who is
carefully advising you these are almost
always really dumb decisions and they're
going to catch up with you okay cause
number three unfavorable payment terms
look unfortunately contractors don't
have the luxury of getting paid upfront
wouldn't that be nice when they land a
job most of the businesses we work with
are taking a deposit somewhere between 0
and 20% if you're building bigger stuff
you might take progress payments if
you're building small stuff maybe not
but it's a risky business because to put
it really simply you foot the bill of
the build before the client does right
that leaves you incredibly exposed so
the solution to this there's a couple
one front and load your payment terms
John wallo in his book built to sell
which I recommend talks about front-end
loading your payment terms now you're
going to have to make this advice work
in the context of your own business but
if you can the idea is this you want to
collect as much cash up front as
possible you want to collect more
through the progress of the job and you
want to leave the smallest amount
possible still owing upon completion
this does two things for you one it
smoothens out the cash inflows over the
Project Life Cycle rather than having
this piddly deposit at the beginning and
then this massive lump sum at the end
and it reduces your downside should
heaven forbid
the client stiffs you they go bankrupt
or they flee the country and and guys
this stuff happens all the time you do
not want to be the schmuck in this
situation the flip side of this is you
also need to be mindful of when you pay
your bills paying early or before it's
due it may seem like a noble or nice
thing to do but it actually puts you in
a pretty risky spot unnecessarily and
what you want to do in most cases is
hold your cash right pay when the bill
is due not a moment sooner uh a good
accountant by the way should be able to
help you set up a really predictable
really reliable accounts payable system
that you can then communicate to all
your vendors and all your subs so
they're on the same page too cause
number four is slow invoicing and no AR
systems not being paid on time for
services delivered sucks it happens to
pretty much every contractor out there
and it can be extremely frustrating
having said that in many many cases it's
the contractor's own fault because they
for got or they got tooo busy to invoice
you can't get paid until you deliver the
bill so deliver it now that's only half
the battle we all know that clients gc's
developers or customers of any kind love
to take their sweet time paying us and
this can create huge cash crunches
Downstream so the solution you need to
put someone in charge of accounts
receivable follow-ups if you can tie
performance bonuses to payments
collected or keeping outstanding
payments under a certain amount make
sure this is handled two automate where
you can QuickBooks and most other
accounting softwares have features built
in that help you invoice and remind
customers to pay their bills
automatically use those tools three if a
customer won't pay you don't be afraid
to get respectfully nasty use demand
letters use leans to ensure you get paid
if you don't understand your lean rights
where you live check the laws in your
Province or state or consult a lawyer
remember it's your money go get it our
fifth and final cause of cash crunches
is rapid growth look growth is fun it's
exciting and we're all for it but it's
also sneaky expensive investing in
marketing team building expanding
Services taking on bigger and riskier
projects new equipment and vehicles all
of this stuff has massive implications
on your cash position and if you're
Cavalier about it you can and will grow
yourself right into bankruptcy because
look you need cash to pay for these
things now but you won't see a return on
your investment until later and if that
later happens to be much later than
originally planned because the market
shifts your sales forecasts were off a
key employee leaves or any one of a
million other reasons you will be caught
holding the bag so there's a couple
solutions for this let me walk you
through this one maybe just slow down a
little right we're huge advocates for
growth but we want to do it in a state
aable and Safe Way ask a contractor
who's doubled their business every year
for 5 years in a row if they would do it
again that way nine out of 10 of them
are going to scream at you hell no
second work with a company like
Breakthrough Academy all we do is
systemize Contracting businesses for
growth and guide entrepreneurs through
this exciting but risky stage of their
journey and to be honest we've gotten
really freaking good at it you can check
us out using the links below a few Pro
tips to close out okay one be as
lendable as possible and keep a sizable
line of credit available at all times of
course not touching it is the hard part
but maintaining some level of liquidity
through good debt facilities is always a
smart idea number two just be
disciplined guys no shiny objects like
do you really need the new F350 just
because they released it I'm not saying
don't treat yourself I'm not saying
don't make Capital investments just be
smart
number three spend more on your
accountant and your other financial
advisors not all accountants are created
equal many are bozos make sure yours
isn't these are dollars well spent so as
we wrap guys those are the five most
common causes of cash crunches and some
tips on how to avoid them cash crunches
are common they're super easy to fall
into it's going to happen to you at some
point but if you have a plan and you
understand the pathway out it'll just be
a blip on the radar
[Music]
B